2.x/register-as-controller.md, before:

# Register your task as a controller

## Registering the route

To run your action as a controller, you simply need to register it in your routes file just like any other invokable controller.

```php
Route::post('/users/{user}/articles', CreateNewArticle::class);
```

## From controller to action

Because you have full control on how your actions are implemented, you need to translate the received request into a call to your `handle` method.

You can use the `asController` method to define that logic. Its parameters will be resolved using route model binding just like it would in a controller.

```php
class CreateNewArticle
{
    use AsAction;

    public function handle(User $user, string $title, string $body): Article
    {
        return $user->articles()->create(compact('title', 'body'));
    }

    public function asController(User $user, Request $request): Response
    {
        $article = $this->handle(
            $user,
            $request->get('title'),
            $request->get('body')
        );

        return redirect()->route('articles.show', [$article]);
    }
}
```

If you're only planning on using your action as a controller, you can omit the `asController` method and use the `handle` method directly as an invokable controller.

```php
class CreateNewArticle
{
    use AsAction;

    public function handle(User $user, Request $request): Response
    {
        $article = $user->articles()->create(
            $request->only('title', 'body')
        )

        return redirect()->route('articles.show', [$article]);
    }
}
```

Note that, in this example, you loose the ability to run `CreateNewArticle::run($user, 'My title', 'My content')`.

## Assigning controller middleware

Instead of — or in addition to — defining your middleware in your routes file, you may also define them directly in the action using the `getControllerMiddleware` method.

```php
class CreateNewArticle
{
    use AsAction;

    public function getControllerMiddleware(): array
    {
        return ['auth', MyCustomMiddleware::class];
    }

    // ...
}
```

## Providing a different response for JSON and HTML

Oftentimes, you'll need your controllers — and therefore actions — to be available both as a web page and as a JSON API endpoint. You'll likely endup doing something like this a little bit everywhere.

```php
if ($request->expectsJson()) {
    return new ArticleResource($article);
} else {
    return redirect()->route('articles.show', [$article]);
}
```

That's why Laravel Actions recognises two helper methods `jsonResponse` and `htmlResponse` that you can use to separate the response based on the request expecting JSON or not.

These methods receive as a first argument the return value of the `asController` method and, as a second argument, the `Request` object.

```php
class CreateNewArticle
{
    use AsAction;

    public function handle(User $user, string $title, string $body): Article
    {
        return $user->articles()->create(compact('title', 'body'));
    }

    public function asController(User $user, Request $request): Article
    {
        return $this->handle($user, $request->get('title'), $request->get('body'));
    }

    public function htmlResponse(Article $article): Response
    {
        return redirect()->route('articles.show', [$article]);
    }

    public function jsonResponse(Article $article): ArticleResource
    {
        return new ArticleResource($article);
    }
}
```

## Registering routes directly in the action

Now this is not for everybody but if you really want to take this "unit of life" to the next level, you may define your routes directly in the action by using the `routes` static method. It provides the `Router` as a first argument.

```php
class GetArticlesFromAuthor
{
    use AsAction;

    public static function routes(Router $router)
    {
        $router->get('author/{author}/articles', static::class);
    }

    public function handle(User $author)
    {
        return $author->articles;
    }
}
```

However, in order for this to work, you need to tell Laravel Actions where your actions are located so it can loop through your static `routes` methods. For that all you need to do is call the `registerRoutes` method of the `Actions` Facade on a service provider. It will look recursively into the folders provided.

```php
use Lorisleiva\Actions\Facades\Actions;

// Register routes from actions in "app/Actions" (default).
Actions::registerRoutes();

// Register routes from actions in "app/MyCustomActionsFolder".
Actions::registerRoutes('app/MyCustomActionsFolder');

// Register routes from actions in multiple folders.
Actions::registerRoutes([
    'app/Authentication',
    'app/Billing',
    'app/TeamManagement',
]);
```

Now that we're familiar on how to use actions as controllers, let's go one step further and see how Laravel Actions can handle [authorization and validation when being used as a controller](./add-validation-to-controllers).

Commit message:

Document the explicit method support as controllers

2.x/register-as-controller.md, after:

# Register your task as a controller

## Registering the route

To run your action as a controller, you simply need to register it in your routes file just like any other invokable controller.

```php
Route::post('/users/{user}/articles', CreateNewArticle::class);
```

## From controller to action

Because you have full control on how your actions are implemented, you need to translate the received request into a call to your `handle` method.

You can use the `asController` method to define that logic. Its parameters will be resolved using route model binding just like it would in a controller.

```php
class CreateNewArticle
{
    use AsAction;

    public function handle(User $user, string $title, string $body): Article
    {
        return $user->articles()->create(compact('title', 'body'));
    }

    public function asController(User $user, Request $request): Response
    {
        $article = $this->handle(
            $user,
            $request->get('title'),
            $request->get('body')
        );

        return redirect()->route('articles.show', [$article]);
    }
}
```

If you're only planning on using your action as a controller, you can omit the `asController` method and use the `handle` method directly as an invokable controller.

```php
class CreateNewArticle
{
    use AsAction;

    public function handle(User $user, Request $request): Response
    {
        $article = $user->articles()->create(
            $request->only('title', 'body')
        )

        return redirect()->route('articles.show', [$article]);
    }
}
```

Note that, in this example, you loose the ability to run `CreateNewArticle::run($user, 'My title', 'My content')`.

## Assigning controller middleware

Instead of — or in addition to — defining your middleware in your routes file, you may also define them directly in the action using the `getControllerMiddleware` method.

```php
class CreateNewArticle
{
    use AsAction;

    public function getControllerMiddleware(): array
    {
        return ['auth', MyCustomMiddleware::class];
    }

    // ...
}
```

## Providing a different response for JSON and HTML

Oftentimes, you'll need your controllers — and therefore actions — to be available both as a web page and as a JSON API endpoint. You'll likely endup doing something like this a little bit everywhere.

```php
if ($request->expectsJson()) {
    return new ArticleResource($article);
} else {
    return redirect()->route('articles.show', [$article]);
}
```

That's why Laravel Actions recognises two helper methods `jsonResponse` and `htmlResponse` that you can use to separate the response based on the request expecting JSON or not.

These methods receive as a first argument the return value of the `asController` method and, as a second argument, the `Request` object.

```php
class CreateNewArticle
{
    use AsAction;

    public function handle(User $user, string $title, string $body): Article
    {
        return $user->articles()->create(compact('title', 'body'));
    }

    public function asController(User $user, Request $request): Article
    {
        return $this->handle($user, $request->get('title'), $request->get('body'));
    }

    public function htmlResponse(Article $article): Response
    {
        return redirect()->route('articles.show', [$article]);
    }

    public function jsonResponse(Article $article): ArticleResource
    {
        return new ArticleResource($article);
    }
}
```

## Registering routes directly in the action

Now this is not for everybody but if you really want to take this "unit of life" to the next level, you may define your routes directly in the action by using the `routes` static method. It provides the `Router` as a first argument.

```php
class GetArticlesFromAuthor
{
    use AsAction;

    public static function routes(Router $router)
    {
        $router->get('author/{author}/articles', static::class);
    }

    public function handle(User $author)
    {
        return $author->articles;
    }
}
```

However, in order for this to work, you need to tell Laravel Actions where your actions are located so it can loop through your static `routes` methods. For that all you need to do is call the `registerRoutes` method of the `Actions` Facade on a service provider. It will look recursively into the folders provided.

```php
use Lorisleiva\Actions\Facades\Actions;

// Register routes from actions in "app/Actions" (default).
Actions::registerRoutes();

// Register routes from actions in "app/MyCustomActionsFolder".
Actions::registerRoutes('app/MyCustomActionsFolder');

// Register routes from actions in multiple folders.
Actions::registerRoutes([
    'app/Authentication',
    'app/Billing',
    'app/TeamManagement',
]);
```

## Routes with explicit methods

On some rare occasions, you might want to use the same action as more than one endpoint. In these situations, you may provide an explicit method when registering the route and that method will be used instead of the `asController` or `handle` method.

This can be particularly helpful when you need to show a form that will then trigger the action.

```php
Route::get('/users/{user}/articles/create', [CreateNewArticle::class, 'showForm']);
Route::post('/users/{user}/articles', CreateNewArticle::class);
```

Note that, when providing an explicit method, no authorization (e.g. `authorize()`) or validation (e.g. `rules()`) will be automatically triggered on that endpoint.

Now that we're familiar on how to use actions as controllers, let's go one step further and see how Laravel Actions can handle [authorization and validation when being used as a controller](./add-validation-to-controllers).
